Introduce a tutorial about fetching data using `package:http` (#4520)
dart-lang/site-www: src/_tutorials/server/fetch-data.md

A URL (Uniform Resource Locator) is a specific kind of URI
that also provides the location of the resource.
URLs for resources on the web contain three pieces of information.
For this current page, the URL is composed of:

* The scheme used for determining the protocol used: `https`
* The authority or hostname of the server: `dart.dev`
* The path to the resource: `/tutorials/server/fetch-data.html`

There are other optional parameters as well
that aren't used by the current page:

* Parameters to customize extra behavior: `?key1=value1&key2=value2`
* An anchor, that isn't sent to the server,
  which points to a specific location in the resource: `#uris`

To learn more about URLs,
see [What is a URL?][] on the mdn web docs.

[What is a URL?]: https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Learn/Common_questions/What_is_a_URL

## Retrieve the necessary dependencies

You can directly use `dart:io` or `dart:html` to make HTTP requests,
however those libraries are platform dependent.
`package:http` provides a cross-platform library
for making composable HTTP requests,
with optional fine-grained control.

To add a dependency on `package:http`,

> run the [`dart pub add`][] command
> while specifying `http`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
run the following [`dart pub add`][] command
from the top of your repo:
```

```terminal
$ dart pub add http
```

> To then use `package:http` in your code,
> import it and optionally [specify a library prefix][]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use `package:http` in your code,
import it and optionally [specify a library prefix][]:
```

<?code-excerpt "lib/fetch_data.dart (http-import)"?>
```dart
import 'package:http/http.dart' as http;
```

To learn more specifics about `package:http`,
see its [page on the pub.dev site][http-pub]
and its [API documentation][http-docs].

[`dart pub add`]: /tools/pub/cmd/pub-add
[specify a library prefix]: /guides/language/language-tour#specifying-a-library-prefix

## Build a URL

As previously mentioned,
to make an HTTP request,

> you first need a URL which identifies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you first need a URL that identifies
```

the resource being requested
or endpoint being accessed.

In Dart, URLs are represented through [`Uri`][] objects.
There are many ways to build an `Uri`,
but due to its flexibility,
parsing a string with `Uri.parse` to
create one is a common solution.

The following snippet shows two ways
to create a `Uri` object
pointing to mock JSON-formatted information
about `package:http` hosted on this site:

<?code-excerpt "lib/fetch_data.dart (build-uris)"?>
```dart
// Parse the entire URI, including the scheme
Uri.parse('https://dart.dev/f/packages/http.json');

// Specifically create a URI with the https scheme
Uri.https('dart.dev', '/f/packages/http.json');
```

To learn about other ways of building and interacting with URIs,
see the [library tour's discussion about URIs][library-tour-uri].

[`Uri`]: {{site.dart-api}}/dart-core/Uri-class.html
[library-tour-uri]: /guides/libraries/library-tour#uris

## Make a network request

If you just need to quickly fetch a string representation
of a requested resource,
you can use the top-level [`read`][http-read]
function found in `package:http`

> which returns a `Future<String>` or throws

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that returns a `Future<String>` or throws
```

retrieve the mock JSON-formatted information
about `package:http` as a string,
then prints it out:

{{site.alert.note}}
  Many functions in `package:http`, including `read`,
  access the network and perform potentially time-consuming operations,
  therefore they do so asynchronously and return a [`Future`][].
  If you haven't encountered futures yet,
  you can learn about them—as well as the `async` and `await` keywords—in the
  [asynchronous programming codelab](/codelabs/async-await).
{{site.alert.end}}

<?code-excerpt "lib/fetch_data.dart (http-read)" replace="/readMain/main/g; /(http\.read)/[!$1!]/g"?>
```dart
void main() async {
  final httpPackageUrl = Uri.https('dart.dev', '/f/packages/http.json');
  final httpPackageInfo = await [!http.read!](httpPackageUrl);
  print(httpPackageInfo);
}
```

This results in the following JSON-formatted output,
which can also be seen in your browser at
[{{site.url}}/f/packages/http.json][mock-http-json].

```json
{
  "name": "http",
  "latestVersion": "0.13.5",
  "description": "A composable, multi-platform, Future-based API for HTTP requests.",
  "publisher": "dart.dev",
  "repository": "https://github.com/dart-lang/http"
}
```  

> Note the structure of the data,
> in this case a map,
> as you will need it when decoding the JSON later on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the structure of the data
(in this case a `Map`),
as you will need it when decoding the JSON later on.
```

If you need other information from the response,
such as the [status code][] or the [headers][],
you can instead use the top-level [`get`][http-get] function

> which returns a `Future` with a [`Response`][http-response].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that returns a `Future` with a [`Response`][http-response].
```

The following snippet uses `get` to get the whole response
in order to exit early if the request was not successful,
which is indicated with a status code of **200**:

<?code-excerpt "lib/fetch_data.dart (http-get)" replace="/getMain/main/g"?>
```dart
void main() async {
  final httpPackageUrl = Uri.https('dart.dev', '/f/packages/http.json');
  final httpPackageResponse = await http.get(httpPackageUrl);
  if (httpPackageResponse.statusCode != 200) {
    print('Failed to retrieve the http package!');
    return;
  }
  print(httpPackageResponse.body);
}
```

There are many other status codes besides **200**

> and your app may want to handle them differently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and your app might want to handle them differently.
```

To learn more about what different status codes mean,
see [HTTP response status codes][] on the mdn web docs.

> If the endpoint you are requesting from requires more information,
> such as authentication or user-agent information,
> it often requires you to include [HTTP headers][headers].
> You can specify headers by passing in a `Map<String, String>`
> of the key-value pairs to the `headers` optional named parameter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some server requests require more information,
such as authentication or user-agent information;
in this case you might need to include [HTTP headers][headers].
You can specify headers by passing in a `Map<String, String>`
of the key-value pairs as the `headers` optional named parameter:
```

Just make sure to clean up with
the [`close`][http-close] method when done:

<?code-excerpt "lib/fetch_data.dart (http-client)" replace="/clientMain/main/g; /(http\.Cl.*?\))/[!$1!]/g; /(client\.c.*?\))/[!$1!]/g"?>
```dart
void main() async {
  final httpPackageUrl = Uri.https('dart.dev', '/f/packages/http.json');
  final client = [!http.Client()!];
  try {
    final httpPackageInfo = await client.read(httpPackageUrl);
    print(httpPackageInfo);
  } finally {
    [!client.close()!];
  }
}
```

To enable the client to retry failed requests,
import `package:http/retry.dart` and
wrap your created `Client` in a [`RetryClient`][http-retry-client]:

<?code-excerpt "lib/fetch_data.dart (http-retry)" plaster="none" replace="/retryMain/main/g; /(i.*?retry.*)/[!$1!]/g; /(Retry.*?\)\))/[!$1!]/g"?>
```dart
import 'package:http/http.dart' as http;
[!import 'package:http/retry.dart';!]

void main() async {
  final httpPackageUrl = Uri.https('dart.dev', '/f/packages/http.json');
  final client = [!RetryClient(http.Client())!];
  try {
    final httpPackageInfo = await client.read(httpPackageUrl);
    print(httpPackageInfo);
  } finally {
    client.close();
  }
}
```

> The `RetryClient` has a default behavior
> for how many times to retry and how long between each request,
> but its behavior can be modified through parameters
> to the [`RetryClient()`][http-retry-client-cons]
> or [`RetryClient.withDelays()`][http-retry-client-delay] constructors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `RetryClient` has a default behavior for how many
times to retry and how long to wait between each request,
but its behavior can be modified through parameters
to the [`RetryClient()`][http-retry-client-cons]
or [`RetryClient.withDelays()`][http-retry-client-delay] constructors.
```

`package:http` has much more functionality and customization,
so make sure to check out its [page on the pub.dev site][http-pub]
and its [API documentation][http-docs].

[http-client]: {{site.pub-api}}/http/latest/http/Client-class.html
[http-close]: {{site.pub-api}}/http/latest/http/Client/close.html
[http-retry-client]: {{site.pub-api}}/http/latest/retry/RetryClient-class.html
[http-retry-client-cons]: {{site.pub-api}}/http/latest/retry/RetryClient/RetryClient.html
[http-retry-client-delay]: {{site.pub-api}}/http/latest/retry/RetryClient/RetryClient.withDelays.html

## Decode the retrieved data

While you now have made a network request
and retrieved the returned data as string,
accessing specific portions of information
from a string can be a challenge.

Since the data is already in a JSON format,
you can use Dart's built-in [`json.decode`][decode-docs] function
in the `dart:convert` library
to convert the raw string into
a JSON representation using Dart objects.
In this case, the JSON data is represented in a map structure

> and in JSON, map keys are always strings,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and, in JSON, map keys are always strings,
```

so you can cast the result of `json.decode` to a `Map<String, dynamic>`:

<?code-excerpt "lib/fetch_data.dart (json-decode)" plaster="none" replace="/decodeMain/main/g; /(import 'd.*?;)/[!$1!]/g; /(json\.de.*?)\;/[!$1!];/g"?>
```dart
[!import 'dart:convert';!]

import 'package:http/http.dart' as http;

void main() async {
  final httpPackageUrl = Uri.https('dart.dev', '/f/packages/http.json');
  final httpPackageInfo = await http.read(httpPackageUrl);
  final httpPackageJson = [!json.decode(httpPackageInfo) as Map<String, dynamic>!];
  print(httpPackageJson);
}
```

[decode-docs]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-convert/JsonCodec/decode.html

### Create a structured class to store the data

To provide the decoded JSON with more structure,
making it easier to work with,

> you can create a class which can store the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
create a class that can store the
```

retrieved data using specific types depending
on the schema of your data.

> The following snippets shows a class-based representation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following snippet shows a class-based representation
```

> which can store the package information returned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that can store the package information returned
```

```dart
class PackageInfo {
  final String name;
  final String latestVersion;
  final String description;
  final String publisher;
  final Uri? repository;

  PackageInfo({
    required this.name,
    required this.latestVersion,
    required this.description,
    required this.publisher,
    this.repository,
  });
}
```

### Encode the data into your class

Now that you have a class to store your data in,
you need to add a mechanism to convert
the decoded JSON into a `PackageInfo` object.

Convert the decoded JSON
by manually writing a `fromJson` method
matching the earlier JSON format,
casting types as necessary
and handling the optional `repository` field:

<?code-excerpt "bin/fetch_http_package.dart (from-json)"?>
```dart
class PackageInfo {
  // ···

  factory PackageInfo.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) {
    final repository = json['repository'] as String?;

    return PackageInfo(
      name: json['name'] as String,
      latestVersion: json['latestVersion'] as String,
      description: json['description'] as String,
      publisher: json['publisher'] as String,
      repository: repository != null ? Uri.tryParse(repository) : null,
    );
  }
}
```

> A handwritten method, such as used here,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A handwritten method, such the previous example,
```

is often sufficient for relatively simple JSON structures,
but there are more flexible options as well.
To learn more about JSON serialization and deserialization,
including automatic generation of the conversion logic,
see the [Using JSON][] guide.

### Convert the response to an object of your structured class

Now you have a class to store your data
and a way to convert the decoded JSON object
into an object of that type.

> Next you can write a function which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you can write a function that
```
https://writeanything.wordpress.com/2008/09/20/grammar-girl-ie-vs-eg/

> puts everything to together:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pulls everything together:
```

   using the `PackageInfo.fromJson` factory constructor you created.

<?code-excerpt "bin/fetch_http_package.dart (get-package)" plaster="none"?>
```dart
Future<PackageInfo> getPackage(String packageName) async {
  final packageUrl = Uri.https('dart.dev', '/f/packages/$packageName.json');
  final packageResponse = await http.get(packageUrl);

  // If the request didn't succeed, throw an exception
  if (packageResponse.statusCode != 200) {
    throw PackageRetrievalException(
      packageName: packageName,
      statusCode: packageResponse.statusCode,
    );
  }

  final packageJson = json.decode(packageResponse.body) as Map<String, dynamic>;

  return PackageInfo.fromJson(packageJson);
}

class PackageRetrievalException implements Exception {
  final String packageName;
  final int? statusCode;

  PackageRetrievalException({required this.packageName, this.statusCode});
}
```

## Utilize the converted data

Now that you've retrieved data and
converted it to a more easily accessible format,
you can use it however you'd like.
Some possibilities include
outputting information to a CLI, or
displaying it in a [web][] or [Flutter][] app.

Here is complete, runnable example

> which requests, decodes, then displays

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that requests, decodes, then displays
```

  final String publisher;
  final Uri? repository;

  PackageInfo({
    required this.name,
    required this.latestVersion,
    required this.description,
    required this.publisher,
    this.repository,
  });

  factory PackageInfo.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) {
    final repository = json['repository'] as String?;

    return PackageInfo(
      name: json['name'] as String,
      latestVersion: json['latestVersion'] as String,
      description: json['description'] as String,
      publisher: json['publisher'] as String,
      repository: repository != null ? Uri.tryParse(repository) : null,
    );
  }
}

class PackageRetrievalException implements Exception {
  final String packageName;
  final int? statusCode;

  PackageRetrievalException({required this.packageName, this.statusCode});

  @override
  String toString() {
    final buf = StringBuffer();
    buf.write('Failed to retrieve package:$packageName information');

    if (statusCode != null) {
      buf.write(' with a status code of $statusCode');
    }

    buf.write('!');
    return buf.toString();
  }
}
```

{{site.alert.flutter-note}}
  For another example that covers fetching then displaying data in Flutter,

>   see the [Fetching data from the internet][] Flutter cookbook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  see the [Fetching data from the internet][] Flutter recipe.
```

{{site.alert.end}}

[web]: /web
[Flutter]: {{site.flutter}}
[Fetching data from the internet]: {{site.flutter-docs}}/cookbook/networking/fetch-data

## What next?

> Now that you have retrieved, parsed, and utilized

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have retrieved, parsed, and used
```
